---
title: "Southern Black Queer Spaces"
author: "Eric Gonzaba"
date: "2020-02-05"
tags: [case-study]
description: "In the South, did gay spaces like bars reflect Jim Crow’s similar repressive regime of segregation? Were bars that catered to racially marginalized people contained in certain areas?"
draft: false
lastmod: "2020-02-10"
---
No study of the American South (or really any part of the United States) would be complete without a thorough examination of race. In his examination of queer life in Mississippi, historian John Howard reminds us that race has a “pervasive influence . . .  in all realms of human behavior.”[^1] In a region of the country when at the first years of our study still suffered through immense apartheid via Jim Crow segregation, we expected to see some trends that reflected the racial dynamics in the burgeoning gay world of the South. Did gay spaces like bars reflect Jim Crow’s similar repressive regime of segregation? Were bars that cater to racially marginalized people contained in certain areas?

Using the Damron Address Books to understand the racial atmosphere of the U.S. South proves difficult. For one, at least in the periods covered in this study, Damron, like many people of his day, largely understood race in a black/white binary. Among the many letter-based amenities that Damron used to classify listings, the only explicitly racial classification was the letter “B.” Damron first used “B” to denote listing where “blacks predominate” in his 1970 publication, the only new listing classification for that year. The classification changes slightly in 1972, denoting instead “blacks frequent,” an explanation for “B” that will be used for the rest of the 1970s and in the 1980 guide as well.

It is unclear why Damron decided to include the “B” label in his classifications, or why he subtly changed the explanation in the 1972 guide. Regarding the latter question, numerous other classification explanations changed throughout the years, so it is likely not of major significance for Damron to alter the text. In fact, as you will read below, Damron eventually would change the whole letter classification for listings friendly to women, from “G” (for girls) to “L”  (for ladies). However, the subtle shift of “predominate” to “frequent” likely suggests that Damron did not want to only use “B” to denote other majority-black spaces but instead places where African Americans made up a sizable proportion of the location.

For our early analysis of the Southern data, we focused on Damron’s “B” classification. However, it should be noted that while Damron mostly utilized his racial classifications on a black/white racial binary, he does occasionally reference at least one other racial distinction in his listings. In his descriptions of several bars in the 1970s, Damron often notes places frequented by Hispanic individuals, often using the term “Latins” to describe them. Other gay travel guides from the period, like Places of Interest, also include designations or pictograms to denote places where African Americans, Latino Americans, and Asian Americans frequented.

Damron left no methodological information about how the books designated listings, so it is not entirely clear what purpose this information served. The publisher might have listed a bar as “B” for the benefit of African American gay men who sought to find spaces that they could be in the company of other African Americans. Alternatively, it’s possible Damron aimed the classification at white men looking to find African American companions, a sort of fetishization of black bodies. It might’ve also served to warn perhaps racist white gay men not to attend bars for the very reason that black men would be in attendance. Whatever the reason, the use of the designation allows us to explore some elements of places that catered to black gay life.

Of all of the listings in our data across the South, just under 2% of them are listed with the “B” label. Nearly all of them over the fifteen-year time period designated as “B” are bars. In 1970, the first year that Damron used the “B” designation, just three bars are listed as blacks predominate, all found in either Houston, Atlanta, or Miami. Perhaps because of the opening up of the designation to “blacks frequent” in 1972, the “B” designation reaches a peak of 22 listings in 1978, with listings from Norfolk, VA, Columbia, SC, and Jacksonville, FL. Nearly all the black listings across any year are located in urban areas, like the vast majority of non “B” listings. A sampling of the maps shows that the vast majority of “B” listings in the lower South. Hardly any B listings can be found in Virginia, Tennessee, or Kentucky in any year. In many ways, this map and data goes against conventional wisdom. According to the 1980 census, the Southern states with the largest proportion of African Americans were Mississippi, South Carolina, and Louisiana. However, our map shows that only 16% of all black listings reside in those states. The largest number of southern black listings are instead located in Texas, Florida, and Georgia, representing nearly 60% of all “B” listings across all the fifteen years.

One facet of Damron’s classification system of relevance concerns Damron’s designations of safety concerns. The most obvious warning to readers of possible unsafe sites was the designation AYOR, which stood for “At Your Own Risk.” This designation, however, does not appear until the 1977 guide. “RT,” another classification that began in 1972 to designate “raunchy types—downtown type places—often hustlers,” suggest Damron’s early attempts to highlight establishments that the guide’s deemed as less than reputable. The Damron guides link sex workers (hustlers) and “downtown types” (likely people who lived in the inner city) to places of vice, crime, and deviancy. Of the 7,774 Southern listings over the fifteen years of data presented, Damron designated 384 southern queer listings as RT. Non-black frequented spaces listed as RT hover just under 4%. However, of all the black listings in the data, nearly half (47%) of them are listed as RT.  The Damron Address Books, whether intentionally or not, seem to promote the idea that black spaces are more often places of lewd and dangerous conduct.

[^1]: John Howard, _Men Like That: A Southern Queer History_ (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 17.
